Config policy management open preview (#7374)
circleci/circleci-docs: jekyll/_cci2/config-policy-management-overview.adoc

---
description: Config policy management for CircleCI project configurations.
version:
- Cloud
---
= Config policy management overview
:page-layout: classic-docs
:page-liquid:
:icons: font
:toc: macro
:toc-title:

NOTE: Config policy management is available on the **Scale** plan and is currently in **open preview**. All aspects of the feature are subject to change.

== Introduction

> Config policy management allows you to create policies for governing CircleCI project configurations. In its strictest case, if a project configuration does not comply with the rules set out in the associated policy, that projects pipelines cannot be triggered until it does comply.

Author: ```suggestion
Config policy management allows you to create policies for governing CircleCI project configurations. In its strictest case, if a project configuration does not comply with the rules set out in the associated policy, pipelines cannot be triggered for that project until it does comply.
```

The `policy_name` must be declared using a partial rule and declare the name as a `rego key`: `policy_name["NAME"]`.

=== Rules

After declaring the `org` package and `policy_name` rule, policies can then be defined as a list of rules. Each rule is composed of three parts:

* Evaluation - Evaluates whether the config contains the policy violation
* Enforcement status - Determines how a violation should be enforced.
* Enablement - Determines if a policy violation should be enabled.

Using this format allows policy writers to create custom helper functions without impacting CircleCI's ability to
parse policy evaulation output. Policies all have access to config data through the `input` variable. The `input` is the project config being evaluated. Since the `input` matches the CircleCI config, you can write rules to enforce a desired state on any available config element, for example, `jobs` or `workflows`.

[source,rego]
----
input.workflows     # an array of nested structures mirroring workflows in the CircleCI config
input.jobs          # an array of nested structures mirroring jobs in the CircleCI config
----

==== Define a rule

> #TODO: update "evaluation name" to "rule definition"#

Author: @davidmparrott can you check this?

version:
- Cloud
---
= Config policy management overview
:page-layout: classic-docs
:page-liquid:
:icons: font
:toc: macro
:toc-title:

NOTE: Config policy management is available on the **Scale** plan and is currently in **open preview**. All aspects of the feature are subject to change.

[#introduction]
== Introduction

Config policy management allows you to create policies for governing CircleCI project configurations. In its strictest case, if a project configuration does not comply with the rules set out in the associated policy, that projects pipelines cannot be triggered until it does comply.

CircleCI uses `config.yml` files to define CI/CD pipelines at the project level. This is a convenient way of developing and iterating quickly, as each pipeline can be made to meet the needs of the project as it grows. However, it can be difficult to manage and enforce organization-wide conventions and security policies. Config policy management adds in this layer of control.

Config policy decisions are stored, and can be audited. This provides useful data about the pipeline defintions being run within your organization.

[#how-config-policy-management-works]

> == How config policy management works

Reviewer: I'm not sure if it would be the most appropriate place, but I think I'd like to see somewhere on this page where one would go to actually set up / manage policies. I know the details are in the other pages but I would have preferred to realize earlier that the policies go in a folder in the repo, as opposed to, for example, somewhere in the CircleCI web app?

Author: ✅

Author: I've added a note and a link to the page for now, but I can revisit later and add more if we think it's needed

parse policy evaulation output. Policies all have access to config data through the `input` variable. The `input` is the project config being evaluated. Since the `input` matches the CircleCI config, you can write rules to enforce a desired state on any available config element, for example, `jobs` or `workflows`.

[source,rego]
----
input.workflows     # an array of nested structures mirroring workflows in the CircleCI config
input.jobs          # an array of nested structures mirroring jobs in the CircleCI config
----

[#define-a-rule]
==== Define a rule

#TODO: update "evaluation name" to "rule definition"#

In OPA, rules can produce any type of output. At CircleCI, rules that produce violations must have outputs of the following types:

* String
* String array
* Map of string to string

This is because rule violations must produce error messages that individual contributors and SecOps can act upon.
Helper rules that produce differently typed outputs can still be defined, but rules that will be considered when making CircleCI decisions must have the output types specified above. For more information see the <<#enablement>> section below.

[#evaluation]
===== Evaluation

> This is how the decision engine determines if a config violates the given policy. The evaluation defines the name and id of the rule, checks a condition, and returns a user-friendly string describing the violation. Rule evaluations include the **rule name** and an **optional rule id**. The rule name will be used to enable and set the enforcement level for a rule.

Author: ✅

[source,rego]
----
hard_fail["use_official_docker_image"]
----

[#enablement]
===== Enablement

A rule must be enabled for it to be inspected for policy violations. Rules that are not enabled do not need to match CircleCI violation output formats, and can be used as helpers for other rules. 

[source,rego]
----
enable_rule["RULE_NAME"]
----

To enable a rule, add the rule as a key in the `enable_rule` object. For example, to enable the rule `use_official_docker_image`, use the following:

[source,rego]
----
enable_rule["use_official_docker_image"]
----

[#using-pipeline-metadata]
=== Using pipeline metadata

When writing policies for circleci config, it is often desirable to have policies that vary slightly in behaviour by project or branch. This is possible using the `data.meta` Rego  property. 

When a policy is evaluated in the context of a triggered pipeline the following three properties will be available on `data.meta`: 

[source,shell]
----
project_id    (CircleCI Project UUID)
branch        (string)
build_number  (number)
----

This metadata can be used to activate/deactive rules, modify enforcement statuses, and be part of the rule definitions themselves.

> The following is an example of a policy that only runs its rule for a single project and enforces it as hardfail only on branch main.

Author: ```suggestion
The following is an example of a policy that only runs its rule for a single project and enforces it as `hard_fail` only on branch main.
```

---
description: Open preview of config policy management for CircleCI
version:
- Cloud
---
= Config policy management overview
:page-layout: classic-docs
:page-liquid:
:icons: font
:toc: macro
:toc-title:

TIP: Config policy management is currently in **open preview**. All aspects of the feature are subject to change. **We recommend you do not use this feature in production**.

== Introduction

> Config policy management allows you to create policies for governing project configurations. In its strictest case, if a project configuration does not comply with the rules set out in the associated policy, that pipeline will be blocked from being triggered until it does comply.

Author: @sagar-connect does this language seem right? "pipeline will be blocked from being triggered" I want us to be very specific in the language we're using rather than saying "the build will fail".

CircleCI uses `config.yml` files to define CI pipelines at the project level. For most use cases this is a convenient way of developing and iterating quickly as each pipeline can be made to meet the needs of the project as it grows. However, from an organizational standpoint, it can be tricky to manage and enforce organization-wide conventions and security policies. Config policy management adds in this layer of control.

Config policy decisions are stored and can be audited. This provides useful data about the pipeline defintions being run within your organization.

== How config policy management works

Config policy management uses a decision engine based on link:https://www.openpolicyagent.org/[Open Policy Agent (OPA)]. Policies are written in the `rego` query language, as defined by OPA. Rule violations are surfaced when pipelines are triggered.

> #TODO: A section on the architecture/process - how a config is evaluated#

Author: @sagar-connect could you check if this "To do" has been addressed?

Reviewer 2: This `todo` is not critical for now, and can be removed and deferred.

== Writing rego policies using CircleCI domain-specific language

> #TODO: re-read to ensure no confusion between rego rules and CircleCI violations#

Reviewer 2: This is still pending imo, we should be adding some examples of circleci violations to set it apart from rules and clear the confusion

Policies are written in `rego`, a purpose-built declarative policy language that supports OPA. You can find more about `rego` in the link:https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-language/[`rego` language docs].

In order for CircleCI to make decisions about your configs, it needs to be able to interpret the output 
generated when your policies are evaluated, therefore, Policies must be written to meet the CircleCI specifications detailed on this page. 

=== Package and name

All policies must belong to the `org` package and declare the policy name as the first rule. All policy rego files should include:

[source,rego]
----
package org

policy_name["unique_policy_name"]
----

The `policy_name` is an alphanumeric string with a maximum length of 80 characters. It is used to uniquely identify the policy by name within the system (similar to a Kubernetes named resource).
Policy names must be unique. Two policies cannot have the same name within an organization.

> The `policy_name` must be declared using a partial rule and declare the name as a `rego key`: `policy_name["NAME"]`.

Author: @sagar-connect what is meant by "partial rule" here?

Reviewer 2: In this context, we are trying to demonstrate the syntax for defining the policy name rule, which is:

`policy_name["name_string"]`

More details about partial rule:
Partial rules are rules that evaluate to partial results on evaluation i.e. the result is an aggregation of all the results for that key. https://medium.com/@agarwalshubhi17/rego-cheat-sheet-5e25faa6eee8#:~:text=evaluate%20to%20true.-,Partial%20rules,-Generating%20sets%3A%20Head

Reviewer 2: And, as you rightly pointed out, this is also true for the policy_name rule:

> Oh I guess it's that it doesn't following the three stage process: evaluation, enforcement, enablement

----
input.workflows     # an array of nested structures mirroring workflows in the CircleCI config
input.jobs          # an array of nested structures mirroring jobs in the CircleCI config
----

==== Define a rule

#TODO: update "evaluation name" to "rule definition"#

In OPA rules can produce any type of output. At CircleCI, rules that produce violations must have outputs of the following types:

* String
* String array
* Map of string to string

This is because rule violations must produce error messages that individual contributors and SecOps can act upon.
Helper rules that produce differently typed outputs can still be defined, but rules that will be considered when making CircleCI decisions must have the output types specified above. For more information see the <<#enablement>> section below.

===== Evaluation

This is how the decision engine determines if a config violates the given policy. The evaluation defines the name and id of the rule, checks a condition, and returns a user-friendly string describing the violation. Rule evaluations include the **rule name** and an **optional rule id**. The rule name will be used to enable and set the enforcement level for a rule.

> #TODO: specify expected outputs#

Author: @sagar-connect could you check if this "To do" has been addressed?

Reviewer 2: same comment for this point as well, need some examples of violation outputs.

                          path[_] == "docker"         # find any settings that match 'docker'
                          image := value[_].image}    # grab the images from that section

----

===== Enforcement

The policy service allows rules to be enforced at different levels.

> #TODO: add default level which is soft fail#

Author: @sagar-connect could you check if this "To do" has been addressed?

Reviewer 2: fixed

```shell
ENFORCEMENT_STATUS["RULE_NAME"]
```

The two available enforcement levels are:

* `hard_fail` - If the `policy-service` detects that the config violated a rule set as `hard_fail`, the build will fail.
* `soft_fail` - If the `policy-service` detects that the config violated a rule set as `soft_fail`, the build will continue but the violation will be logged in the `policy-service` decision log.

```shell
hard_fail["use_official_docker_image"]
```

===== Enablement

> A rule must be enabled for it to be inspected for policy violations. Rules that are not enabled do not need to match CircleCI violation output formats, and can be used as helpers for other rules. 

Reviewer 2: "Helpers" is not a rego specific term.
In this context we are trying to convey that we are providing some basic CircleCI-specific useful functions that will help our users in writing cleaner policies and avoiding repetitive boilerplate code from their policies. Some of these helpers are written after inputs from our solution engineers based of their needs, and we expect we would be writing a lot more in the future.

Imagine these are kind of similar in concept to what orbs are for configs.

```

### Using Pipeline Metadata

When writing policies for circleci config, it is often desired to have policies that vary slightly in behaviour by project or branch. This is possible using the `data.meta` rego property access. When a policy is evaluated in the context of a triggered pipeline the following three properties will be available on `data.meta`: 

```
project_id    (CircleCI Project UUID)

> branch        (string)

Author: What is `build_number`?

Reviewer 3: It's the id of the build. For example, [here's](https://app.circleci.com/pipelines/github/circleci/circleci-docs/45445/workflows/6bf6947f-9d7b-4528-b841-aa619a8e7191/jobs/143322) a link for a build from this PR. The number at the end of the URL is the build number

Author: Ah right, we call this the job number

Author: the metadata is actually `build_number`?

Author: For example: https://circleci.com/docs/api/v2/index.html#operation/getJobDetails (job number) - just to check we're talking about the same thing

Reviewer 4: Yes they are the same. job_number and build_number. I guess there are two different names for the same thing... We could add an alias `job_number` that would be the same as `build_number` if that would be helpful.

The metadata can be found on the key `meta` of the global object `data`. It looks like this:

```
data:
  meta:
     build_number: (int)
     project_id:       (string/uuid)
     branch:            (string)
```

The following command will request a decision for the provided config input and return a Circle Decision containing the status of the decision
and any violations that may have occurred. 

> #TODO: add links to circleci-cli/references#

Author: @sagar-connect could you check if this "To do" has been addressed?

Reviewer 3: I'm not even sure what we would be linking to in circleci-cli can @sagar-connect or @davidmdm let us know if we need this still? If we don't hear back in a day let's just remove the TODO

Reviewer 2: I think this point is suggesting to include links to `decision` command in CLI.
https://github.com/circleci/circleci-docs/blob/DOCTEAM-765-config-policy/jekyll/_cci2/use-the-cli-for-config-and-policy-development.adoc#developing-policies

```bash
circleci policy decide --input $PATH_TO_CONFIG $PATH_TO_POLICY_DIR
```

Policies that use `data.meta...` values like `branch` or `project_id` should also provide a json file mocking those values with `--metafile $PATH_TO_JSON`

It is recommended that users build a test suite of policy/config combinations and run them locally or in CI before pushing them to their organization's active policies.

> #TODO: further discuss testing recommendations (maybe a separate written section)#

Author: @sagar-connect could you check if this "To do" has been addressed?

Reviewer 3: This is still outstanding. We could ship without it but having it would significantly improve the customer experience around testing policies.

Following is the output of this command when run with `--help` flag:

> #TODO: update help output to contain status filter flag#

Author: @sagar-connect could you check if this "To do" has been addressed?

Reviewer 3: This has been addressed

```
circleci policy logs --help                                                                                  11:43:35
Get policy decision logs / Get decision log (or policy bundle) by decision ID

Usage:
  circleci policy logs [decision_id] [flags]

Examples:
policy logs --owner-id 462d67f8-b232-4da4-a7de-0c86dd667d3f --after 2022/03/14 --out output.json

Flags:
      --after string        filter decision logs triggered AFTER this datetime
      --before string       filter decision logs triggered BEFORE this datetime
      --branch string       filter decision logs based on branch name
      --context string      policy context (default "config")
  -h, --help                help for logs
      --out string          specify output file name
      --owner-id string     the id of the policy's owner
      --policy-bundle       get only the policy bundle for given decisionID
      --project-id string   filter decision logs based on project-id
      --status string       filter decision logs based on their status

Global Flags:
      --host string              URL to your CircleCI host, also CIRCLECI_CLI_HOST (default "https://circleci.com")
      --policy-base-url string   base url for policy api (default "https://internal.circleci.com")
      --skip-update-check        Skip the check for updates check run before every command.
      --token string             your token for using CircleCI, also CIRCLECI_CLI_TOKEN
```

Config Policy Management is a beta feature. If this feature interests you please contact us to participate in the beta. 

> #TODO: figure out a clearer path for "contact us" - maybe Idoh would know#

Author: @sagar-connect could you check if this "To do" has been addressed?

Reviewer 3: @gersteni has suggested that we use his circleci.com email address (not posting here since this is a public repo)

Author: Docs is all open source so if we add it it will be public 🤷
